[[Globalization - A Short History]]

## Preface

This book is the contribution of two historians to an ever-widening
debate about globalization. Few subjects are more important for
understanding the contemporary world, and few are more contested and
more in need of careful empirical investigation. The debate on
globaliza- tion takes place in many different fields and academic
disciplines. Economics, sociology, political science, and cultural
studies are only the most important among them.  What historians have
to offer is close attention to change.  When they look at the world in
the early twenty-first century, they ask how our present condition
came about.  ‘They are interested in the emergence of the present, in
historical parallels and precedents, and in possible alternatives
and paths not taken.

Change can be described along various temporal scales, ranging from
instantaneous events to long-term developments spanning centuries or
even millennia. The word “globalization” indicates change and dynamism
over time.  It refers to a process or, as we will try to show, to a
bun- dle of related processes that do not necessarily progress at the
same speed or move in the same direction. Moreover, they affect the
various parts of the world in quite different ways. When did
globalization begin? The world did not turn “global” overnight. No
single event, neither the invention of the Internet nor the fall of
the iron curtain, inaugurated an entirely new age out of the
blue. Globality has a history reaching back far before modern
times. This book traces the emergence of relations between communities
across vast spaces and long distances over the past seven or eight
centuries. It grows more detailed as globalizing tendencies intensify
in the more recent past. We do not deny that already in early ages
travelers and traders performed feats of voyaging and land-bound
transport. It is also obvious that several major civilizations, for
example, China or the early the Arab-Muslim civilization, had good
reasons to regard themselves as centers of the “world” as it was known
to them. Yet we detect incipient globalization not before the epoch
that, in Western terms, is known as the High Middle Ages. The Mongol
world-empire of the thirteenth century, originating in Inner Asia, for
the first time opened up the chance to spread goods and ideas across a
huge space from the Yellow Sea to degree of regularity and stability
and where they affect more than tiny numbers of people. Relations have
to crystallize into institutions in order to gain permanence. The
Mongolian empire was fragile and disintegrated after a few
decades. Nowhere did it create a durable political order. This
transience was different from the new empires of the sixteenth
century. European overseas expansion resulted in large-scale
colonization and state-building in the New World and in the emergence
of the Atlantic as a new arena of trade—in goods and enslaved
people—between many different civilizations. At the same time, mighty
continen- tal empires were established or consolidated by indigenous
rulers across Asia, while Europeans entered Asia as merchants and
missionaries. Their early trading empires later grew into territorial
dominion in India, Indonesia, and elsewhere.

However, the early history of globalization is not merely about
imperial expansion. It is also about the emergence and growth of a
world economy. The various empires slowly became enmeshed into even
more extended webs of exchange. While long-distance trade by land and
by sea is an ancient phenomenon, integrated world markets for goods,
capital, and labor were unknown before the middle of the nineteenth
century. Since that time, their evolution and their impact on
individual countries and societies has been one of the major factors
forging links across the planet. Yet another important aspect of
globalization is an outlook that seeks to transcend parochialism and
ethno- centrism, in other words, a “global consciousness.” Even today,
few people “think globally,” and even fewer did so in the
past. However, these cosmopolitan minorities who did possess a global
perspective, for example, the early Jesuit missionaries or the
philosophers and scientists of the Enlightenment, were pioneers who
grappled with the tension between universal values and the plurality
of cultures on earth. Such a tension is still very much with us.

The chapters in this book are arranged in chronological sequence. We
distinguish between four major periods.  Until the mid-eighteenth
century, empire-building, trade, and religious solidarity encouraged
intercontinental exchange on an expanding scale. From about the
1750s onward, political revolution in the Americas and in Europe
intensified imperial rivalry, and the industrialization of some parts
of the Northern Hemisphere created networks of traffic, communication,
migration, and commerce that in density and strength surpassed
anything known up to that time. Our third period begins in the 1880s
and lasts until the end of World War II. Its main features were the
politicization of globalization through attempts to turn it into an
instrument of national policies; the seemingly final division of the
world among the imperialist great powers; and the growth of global
flows of capital and the rise of programs envisaging the reordering of
the entire globe in terms of liberalism (Woodrow Wilson) or
revolutionary socialism (Lenin). The 1930s and early 1940s witnessed
a catastrophic breakdown of globalization. Characteristically,
however, the crises and conflicts of those years were of a truly
worldwide scope. The fourth period, beginning in 1945, was dominated
by attempts to avoid the mistakes made during the period between the
two world wars.  While the world economy was reconstructed along
liberal lines, the antagonism of the American-led “free world” and the
Soviet bloc during the Cold War prevented many potential relations and
linkages from unfolding. This is why we speak of “globalization split
in two.” During this fourth period, mass tourism, the rise of global
media and global forms of entertainment, and the universal spread of
Western patterns of consumption were already pointing to- ward the
kind of everyday experience characteristic of the early twenty-first
century. Problems such as environmental damage, competition over
scarce resources (oil, for example), and even terrorism began to
assume a transcontinental character. By the early 1980s many of the
elements of contemporary globalization were in place.

This book is very short. The format allows us to develop our
historical arguments as concisely as possible. At each stage we
provide examples without trying to be exhaustive. Encyclopedic
completeness cannot possibly be a goal of an interpretive and
introductory text. A list of Recommended Literature will direct
readers to a universe of historical detail. If this were a brief
history of the world as a whole, the authors would have an obligation
to deal evenhandedly with all civilizations and all parts of the
planet. In a history of globalization, by contrast, we are free to
choose where to place our emphasis. To give just one example, in
writing about the later nineteenth century, it would simply be wrong
not to be “Eurocentric.” For other, both earlier and later, periods of
history such a Eurocentric perspective is quite misguided.

‘The original German edition benefited from an interdisciplinary
seminar, jointly taught with Aleida Assmann, S. N. Eisenstadt, and
Bernhard Giesen at the University of Konstanz in summer 2003. For
his support in bringing about an American edition we are greatly
indebted to Sven Beckert. Jiirgen Osterhammel also wishes to express
his gratitude to the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study (NIAS)
and its former rector, H. L. Wesseling, for the opportunity to read
and reflect leisurely on a boundless topic.

