# The Work Group Within the Organization: A Sociopsychological Approach

Peter M. Newton and Daniel J. Levinson
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University Medical School
PSYCHIATRY, Vol. 36, May 1973, pp. 115-142.

(Excerpts formatted by Bill Anderson, 2021-04-19. Note: footnote numberings are unique to this extract; they do not match the numbering in the full article.)

### Abstract

THE SMALL WORK GROUP is a basic component of modern organizational
life. Crucial tasks at every level of the organization are entrusted
to work groups of various kinds: executive committees, staff meetings
and committees with responsibility for policy review, budget planning,
training, integration of services, and the like. Work groups abound in the
clinical facility and university as in the business firm and government
agency. The work group is an important linking device between the
organization and the individual. From the point of view of the
organization, it serves as a mechanism to accomplish or to undermine
diverse organizational goals. From the point of view of the individual
the work group is a significant arena in which he(sic) can learn about the
organization and have a voice in the shaping of its policies and
practices -- or in which he can experience the corruption of theˆ
organization and his own powerlessness within it. By and large, work
groups do not work very well; they do little either to accomplish
organizational tasks or to elicit the responsible, constructive
participation of individual members. The resultant costs to both the
organization and the individual members are enormous. Despite the
widespread dissatisfaction with work groups, relatively little effort
has been given to the systematic analysis and improvement of their
functioning. In this paper we present a theoretical approach and
demonstrate its utility in the analysis of a clinical team within a
psychiatric research ward. 

### Introductory

A work group is ordinarily established in order to carry out one or
more organizational tasks. The task is given at least preliminary
definition in advance and is indicated in the group's title (e.g., the
program committee or the ... leadership meeting), but it may be
clarified, expanded, or markedly changed as the group evolves.
Membership in the group may be based on assignment, election, or
volunteering. Our emphasis here is on the small work group, which
contains at the most 20 members and usually under 15. Most work groups
are within this range of size.

### AIMS AND THEORETICAL APPROACH

Our primary purpose, as noted above, is to develop a theoretical
framework for the analysis of the work group.(Note1) The major rubrics
in this framework are: task, social structure, culture, and social
process. As used here, these terms refer not to simple, unitary
concepts but to complex, interrelated perspectives or vantage points
from which groups and organizations can be examined.

The concept of task refers to the end toward which work is directed;
the work is successful to the extent that it accomplishes the
task. The conceptual emphasis upon task serves to keep in focus the
raison d’étre of the group: the ongoing work, and indeed the very
existence of the group, derive from the organization which has created
it as a means toward some larger goals. The notion of task would seem
to be rather concrete and self-evident, and hardly meriting a major
place in a theoretical scheme. In the simplest case, a group has a
single, stable, well-defined and consensually agreed-upon task that it
pursues unswervingly to completion.

The simplest case is, however, much more the exception than the
rule. By and large, the definition and implementation of task is a
complicated matter for the group, and the analysis of task-evolution
poses difficult problems for the investigator. Rather than having a
single primary task the group may have multiple major tasks without a
clear order of priority; in this case a great deal of effort may go
(explicitly or implicitly) to the clarification of task priorities or
to struggles over the ordering of priorities. Again, although it may
be possible to define a single task simply and concretely on paper,
complications may arise over the meaning of key terms in the
task-definition or over the nature and priority of the component tasks
that were not clearly recognized in advance. Even where tasks are
clearly defined and their respective priorities established, the group
or the organization may find that there are serious incompatibilities
among the major tasks to which it has become committed.

One manifestation of the multiplicities, ambiguities, and
contradictions relating to task-definition is the consternation that
is usually evoked in a group when, in the midst of a silence or a
heated argument, a member suddenly asks, “Could someone tell me the
real purpose for which this group is meeting?” Tasks have a way of
shifting, multiplying, dissolving, appearing different to different
group members. Most groups spend a good deal of time in dealing with
(or in avoiding) problems of ambiguity or contradiction in
task-definition, problems of establishing an order of task-priorities,
and problems of dissensus in these matters. In our view, then, the
analysis of task-definition and its vicissitudes deserves major
attention in the study of the work group.

The work group must also be examined from the perspective of its
evolving social structure. Our emphasis here will be on two components
of structure, namely the division of labor and the division of
authority. There is a division of labor to the extent that different
members carry out different parts of the total work of the group. This
differentiation is ordinarily but not always expressed in the naming
of positions within the group (e.g., in terms of the clinical example
in this paper: teachers, students; chairman, members representing
different constituencies; ward chief, head nurse, and others
comprising a ward leadership group). Informal, implicitly defined
positions may also emerge (e.g., it is “understood” that Member X
functions as assistant to the chief, or that Member Y attends
meetings but does no work). There is a division of authority to the 
extent that the legitimate power and responsibility to make decisions
are distributed unequally within the group. 

At least a minimal degree of hierarchy exists in every organizational
work group but - especially in mental health and related professional
organizations - the lines of authority are often blurred and made
covert. The social structure of the work group tends to reflect the
social structure of the organization. The individual members are often
appointed to represent their occupations or work units. The hierarchy 
in the work group ordinarily corresponds to the hierarchy in the
organization; thus, the chairman of a committee usually has higher
organizational status than any other committee member, and members
having low organizational status have a hard time functioning as peers
with high-status members even when no formal distinctions are made.

The work group tends also to develop a culture, that is, a relatively
enduring pattern of core values, assumptions, and beliefs that
provides a framework for group development and action. As in the case
of social structure, the culture of the work group is strongly
influenced by the culture of the organization. To the extent that the
organization has an integrated, well-established culture, the work
group is likely to form a similar, derivative culture. In times of
ferment and social conflict, the organization contains not only a
traditional culture but in addition one or more newly emerging and
competing cultures. Analysis of the organization, and of the work
group, must therefore take into account the struggles among
conflicting cultural values and orientations.

Finally, we examine the work group from the vantage point of social
process. We use this term in the broad sense to refer to how a group
works — to its modes of functioning, the ways in which it goes about
accomplishing or avoiding or sabotaging its tasks. Social process thus
has myriad aspects, from the highly rational forms of planning,
problem solving, and collaborative use of technical skills to the most
irrational forms of destruction of any real work as well as
exploitation and humiliation of members. Our analysis of social
process will focus especially on recurring themes in the ongoing life
of the work group. The themes derive both from the situational
realities and from the widely shared feelings, fantasies, and
conflicts of individual members. Once again, work group and
organization are interrelated: the process themes in the organization
tend to be reflected in its component groups.

### PRIMARY TASK

A task is the end toward which work is aimed. That is, we
differentiate modes of work from task. There are often various kinds
of work which seem more or less appropriate for a given group to
engage in (e.g., in a colloquium meeting, to have each member lecture,
to bring in outside speakers, to create panels for discussion,
etc.). However, a rational and effective choice among various modes of
work can only be made by reference to the group’s task, that is, by
reference to the end toward which the work is aimed. The work which
the group engages in needs to be directly and necessarily related to
the task being pursued. Where it is not, the enterprise and, 
ultimately, the group, may be in jeopardy. 

Organizations usually, and groups at times, have multiple major
tasks. Following Miller and Rice, we define the primary task as the
task which the group or organization must achieve at some significant
level if it is to survive. Typically, other tasks are given second
priority, and resources such as time, energy, space, and money are
allocated accordingly. Often the secondary tasks will stand in a
support or maintenance relationship to the primary task -- for
example, the recruitment of faculty in a teaching institution.

The definition of primary task has important consequences for a group
or organization. As noted above, it may provide the basis for
decisions regarding the mode of work the group will adopt and the
technology it will employ. Definition of primary task may also form
the basis for the creation of social structures aimed at organizing
work on the task. Finally, it provides an essential criterion for
evaluating performance.

Definition of primary task also generates conflict, stimulating the
emergence of competing values, ideologies, and factions. Put simply,
as soon as people know what it is that they are supposed to do,
serious differences may emerge as to how best to do it, whether it is
worth doing, and whether some other task would not be more
valuable.(Note3)

As noted earlier, the definition of primary task and the
relative priority of the major tasks are often ambiguous or
nonconsensual. Moreover, the “official” task of a group may differ
from what is widely understood to be the real task. Such ambiguity
regarding task definition has major consequences. If there is
unclarity in a system about what it is that its members are to do,
then competing and incompatible goals may be variously pursued and the
legitimacy of any given action is in doubt. 

### SOCIAL STRUCTURE

For present purposes, we limit our discussion to two critical aspects
of social structure, namely, the relatively enduring arrangements
which govern (1) the division of labor and (2) the division of
authority and the boundaries which are created by these divisions. We
shall consider each element separately.

#### The Division of Labor

The division of labor refers to the way in which the total work of a
social system is distributed among its component parts. This division
is formalized in the creation of positions. Positions are the basic
element of the division of labor in groups and organizations. They
are, more or less, formally defined and permanent; they are changed
through a redefinition of organizational structure, not through the
comings and goings of individuals. Individuals occupy positions and
from these positions engage in activities or carry out functions --
that is, they define and take roles.(Note8) Role performance is structurally
based in requirements which accompany a given position. However, the
requirements are typically ambiguous enough and the role standardizing
forces within the social system are weak enough so that individual
role performance is shaped not only by formal requirements (and
situational exigencies) but also by the personal attributes of the
individual who occupies the position.

The greater the differentiation of subsystems and individual labor,
the greater is the need for integration of individual and group
activities. If integration is to be achieved, one or a few individuals
must have responsibility for ordering and coordinating the activities
of many others. Responsibility requires that one have the authority -—
the legitimate right—to make demands, exert influence, and impose
sanctions. Organizations are stratified in order to achieve the
integration necessary to the fulfillment of complex tasks; that is to
say, the positions comprising the social structure of the organization
are hierarchically arranged. This hierarchy constitutes the division
of authority which is another central aspect of social structure.

#### The Division of Authority

We refer here to the patterning of subordination within the
organization. Authority confers legitimacy, or right, to initiate and
influence processes, to command and direct resources.(Note7) Within a
rational work structure, authority is vested in positions not in
individuals, and authority is a corollary of responsibility. That is,
a position is invested with the authority necessary to meet the
responsibilities corresponding to the level of that position within
the organizational hierarchy. If the occupant of a position is
responsible for supervising and coordinating the work of a number of
individuals, then he should have available to him as a property of his
position sufficient authority to cause subordinates to be responsive
to his directions or suggestions. It is empirically true, of course,
that often a position carries far greater responsibility than
authority. In such instances, some degree of disorganization is the
predictable result and task performance suffers accordingly.

It is useful to distinguish between the authority which, as a
structural property, is inherent in a position and the authority which
the occupant of that position in fact exercises. The latter may be
greater or less than the former. The individual may fail or choose not
to employ some aspects of the authority available to him, or, through
manifest personal ineptitude, he may impoverish his position even as
he attempts to be authoritative. On the other hand, he may, through
personal preference and ability, succeed in getting superiors to
delegate to him, and peers and subordinates to accept from him,
greater authority than is strictly inherent in his office.

#### Boundaries

The division of labor defines boundaries, and the division of
authority locates responsibility for regulating them. The concept of
boundary is an aspect of open system theory, which treats
organizations as systems whose survival requires continuous exchange
of materials with the environment (Katz and Kahn; Miller and Rice;
also cf. Silverman). Too permeable a boundary invites
inundation, chaos, and disorganization, whereas an impermeable
boundary becomes a barrier, causing death through entropy.
(This last phrase is confusing as the use of the word "entropy" in open systems theory is assumed.)

The top management of an organization has responsibility both for the
internal functioning of that system and for the regulation of its
boundaries with the external environment. Authority for the internal
operations can be largely delegated to subordinates. External boundary
regulation is, however, much less delegatable; it must become the
major task of top management if the system is to obtain the necessary
inputs, to export the products of its labor, and to sustain a viable,
self-determining relationship with its environment. An overly
inward-oriented management negiects the boundary tasks and produces an
encapsulated system that tends to become stagnant and incapable of
growth --a common phenomenon in health and educational organizations.

In addition to boundaries separating the organization from its
environment, there are also boundaries internal to the
organization. These internal boundaries separate task systems from
each other and, within the task system, separate distinct work
groups. The regulation of internal boundaries is also a management
task at the organizational level at which they occur; i.e., the
leadership of a given subsystem must give major effort to boundary
transactions with adjacent subsystems and with the authority to which
it is responsible.

As noted, boundaries are a consequence of social structure. They are
created through the division of labor --the delineation of positions,
work groups, and task systems. Similarly, a crucial aspect of the
division of authority involves the designation of positions and groups
as having responsibility for the regulation of various boundaries.

### CULTURE

Culture is an aspect of social systems whether they are societies,
communities, organizations, or work groups. We use the term culture to
refer to central and relatively enduring values, assumptions, and
beliefs which characterize a given social system and which are
interrelated over time with the system’s social structure. Social
structure tends to reflect underlying cultural values and helps to
realize those values. Culture and social structure tend to be
relatively congruent, but in a changing social system the fit will not
be perfect. Over time, changes in the one are likely to produce
changes in the other.

### SOCIAL PROCESS

In our usage of the concept of social process, we intend two
meanings. The first, more specific meaning is that commonly employed
in the literature on group dynamics (Bion; Slater; Rioch). In this
literature, the term group process is used to refer to the imagery,
fantasies, and feelings, nonrational and irrational, which
characterize collective life. These processes may interfere with the
performance of group tasks, and to some extent (as Rice, 1969, has
indicated) emanate from all those aspects of the person which are
unused by his specific and limited role in the task work.

Our more general meaning of social process includes the former, yet
more broadly encompasses mode and tempo of work, what in fact the
group does. What  methodology (or technology) does the group employ to
accomplish its task and what is the tempo of the work -— continuous,
low levels of activity over time (as in a small branch library) or
alternating brief periods of intense activity and long periods of
quiescence (a fire department)?

### CONCLUSIONS

We conclude by restating and elaborating briefly on the two underlying
theses of this study.

Thesis I: Social process in the work group is intimately related to
its tasks, social structure, and culture.

Thesis II: The work group itself is strongly influenced by the tasks,
structure, culture, and process of the organization.

As to theory, we take the view that a combined sociological and
psychological perspective is required if we are to develop an adequate
social psychology of work groups and organizations. Mental health
professionals and investigators, operating from the model of the
individual or the dyad, have usually focused upon personal feelings
and interpersonal events in groups to the exclusion of task, culture,
social structure, and process both within the small group and in its
social environment. This approach immediately reduces group phenomena
to an individual or dyadic level, rather than starting with the group
as social fact requiring its own appropriate (sociopsychological)
level of analysis and then proceeding to the individual. The result is
a psychology of the individual or the pair within an unexplained group
setting (i.e., unexplained because unexamined). This approach, however
valuable in itself, does not provide or utilize a theory of groups,
and the essential social facts to be explained are defined out of
existence. It is our belief that a comprehensive theory of the work
group cannot be limited to a single level of analysis but must
conjointly utilize group-level constructs (such as task, culture,
social structure, and process)(Note12) as well as constructs relating
the group to its organizational and wider social context, on the one
hand, and to its individual members, on the other.

### REFERENCES

Bion, WILFRED R, Experiences in Groups; London, Tavistock Pubs., 1959.

Bucuer, Rue. “Social Process and Power in a Medical School,” in Mayer N. Zald (Ed.), Power in Organizations; Nashville, Vanderbilt Univ. Press, 1970.

DURKHEIM, EMILE. Suicide; Free Press, 1951.

GOFFMAN, Ervinc. Asylums; Doubleday Anchor, 1961.

Hopeson, RIcHARD C., LEVINSON, DANIEL J., and ZALEZNIK, ABRAHAM. Executive Role Constellation; Harvard Univ. Graduate School of Business Administration, 1965.

INKELES, ALEX, and LEVINSON, DaNreL J. “The Personal System and the Sociocultural System in Large-Scale Oganizations,” Sociometry (1963) 26:217-229

Katz, DANIEL, and KAHN, Ropert L. The Social Psychology of Organizations; Wiley, 1965.


Note1: Our conception of “work group” needs to be distinguished
from that of Bion. For Bion, the work group is that aspect of group
functioning which is not pervaded by basic assumption life. In his 
theory, the group is a work group only when it dedicates itself to the
real work for which it has met. When the group is unable or unwilling
to so dedicate itself, but instead acts on the basis of some
irrational assumption (e.g., dependency, pairing, fight-flight)
regarding its task, it is a “basic assumption” group. We, also,
distinguish the extent to which a group devotes itself to task work as
opposed to other concerns, including irrational ones. For us, however,
a work group is an aspect of social reality and, as such, cannot be
interpreted in and out of existence. It is always a work group no
matter how the group's efforts are divided between the pursuit of its
defined task and the pursuit of other aims.

Note3: Group dynamic theorists within the Tavistock tradition
(e.g., Bion, Menzies) have tended to view organization and social
structure as a defense against anxiety. Not only is such a reduction
of complex social phenomena to individual-psychological constructs
epistemologically problematic (cf. Durkheim), but also this specific
interpretation is often untrue even within its own frame of
reference. Using such a conceptualization, one often sees the reverse
-- the development of disorganization or chaos in part as a defense
against anxiety. Not infrequently (as in the present ward), a group or
its leadership may allow and even foster ambiguity and confusion
regarding the nature of the primary task in order to avoid what is
anticipated to be sharp, focused, and painful conflict.

Note8: The distinction between position and role
(Levinson, 1959) is important here -- position refers to structure,
role to function. If one loses the idea of position and thinks
exclusively in terms of role, as many social scientists do, then the
examination of organization tends to overemphasize process, activity,
and function and to overlook the structural base from which
organizational activity proceeds. An occupant of one single position
may, and probably will, carry out numerous functions deriving from his
position; confusion ensues if one assumes that each function involves
a separate location in organizational space.


Note7: There is no general consensus regarding the definition of the
concept of authority. Often, the terms authority and power are used
interchangeably. For us, there is an important difference between
these two notions which, if obscured, limits the analysis of social
systems. This difference rests upon the issue of legitimacy. Power
denotes sheer capacity and implies nothing about the right to possess
or use it. Whereas authority, by our definition, always involves some
degree of power, power need not involve authority at al! Thus, anyone
with a gun has power but, under the law, only the policeman ordinarily
has the authority --the legitimate right-- to use one. Authority
degenerates into power when its legitimate --legal or moral—- basis is
eroded or overreached (cf. Schaar's “Legitimacy in the Modern
State’). Katz and Kahn's treatment of authority (p. 220) as legitimate
power inherent in positions within the organization is consistent with
our meaning.

Note12: We do not regard this set of four constructs as
exhaustive. In working toward a comprehensive analytical framework, we
have started with these because we consider them of central
importance. Among the other constructs that need to be taken into
account in the study of groups and organizations are: material
resources, technology, demography (ie., the distribution of social and
psychological characteristics such as sex, age, race, and
work-relevant personality characteristics), and the like. An
additional construct of importance here is that of “career”; that is, 
the differential participation of individuals in the work of the group
and the organization ts determined to varying degrees by
considerations of career.
