---
created: 2021-10-22T21:04:46-05:00
modified: 2021-10-22T21:05:32-05:00
---

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): Now, just to write one article that wouldn't necessarily have been a good use of time. But a nice thing about Anki is that the information is retained. When the AlphaGo Zero and AlphaZero papers came out, they were very easy to read.

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): Verb form: I talk and think of "Ankifying" a paper or book etc.

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): It's easy to overdo it, especially initially, and waste time Ankifying useless info. Over time, I've found myself cultivating heuristics for how much to Ankify.

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): E.g., for many papers the answer is 0 to 5 questions. But for papers I want to understand better it might be 20 to 40. And for deep papers that I want to master it may be hundreds.

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): Lots more to say, but I'll leave it there for now.

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): Update: I wrote a detailed essay about how to use memory systems here: http://augmentingcognition.com/ltm.html

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): And about how to use memory systems to much more deeply understand a piece of mathematics: https://cognitivemedium.com/srs-mathematics

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): With @andy_matuschak, a new mnemonic medium that integrates an explanatory essay with a memory system, to (we hope) make it much easier to internalize technical material: https://quantum.country/qcvc

Michael Nielsen (@michael_nielsen): And a much broader essay, discussing how to build tools that change and augment people's thinking, with a focus on memory: https://numinous.productions/ttft (also with @andy_matuschak ).
