Copyrighted Material

[[Globalization - A Short History]]

## “Globalization”: Circumnavigating a Term

Chapter 1: A Diagnosis of the Present and a Term for a Historical Process

“Globalization” is a term often used to explain today’s world. For
years, it lay nearly dormant, used only in a few select publications
by a handful of economists writing on very specialized topics. Then,
in the 1990s, globalization was embraced by a wider public and has
since skyrocketed to terminological stardom. It has been integrated
into the vocabulary of numerous languages, and various scholarly
fields have adopted it as a leitmotiv and the central category of
their research. Every day the list of literature on globalization or
globality, global history or global capitalism grows longer. The
semantic thicket is already so dense that we need help in blazing a
trail through it.’ In addition to the studies examining the specific
effects of current economic globalization, an increasing number of
publications deal with this topic in a more general or theoretical
nature.  When journalists begin to philosophize about the state of
affairs in the world, it does not take long before globalization is
mentioned. The term is therefore in danger of becoming just another
word generously used in the art of terminological name-dropping, a
term whose exact meaning is irrelevant as long as it creates an
impression of profundity strong enough to ward off skeptical
questions.

The general popularity of “globalization” is, however, more than just
a symptom of a collective unwillingness to think, The term is
unrivaled in its ability to fulfill a legitimate need: to give us a
name for the times in which we live. In recent decades it has not been
easy to succinctly express the nature of the contemporary era. In the
1950s many raved about the “atomic age.” In the 1960s and 1970s some
talked about advanced “industrial society” and others about “late
capitalism.” In the 1980s the term “tisk society” got a good deal of
attention and the “post- modern” came into fashion, but the latter
could not gain a strong foothold in the consciousness of the general
public because it seemed so intangible. “Globalization” is of an
entirely different caliber. In a single word, this term summarizes a
wide spectrum of experiences shared by many people. For one, the
people of the world’s wealthy nations find (nearly) the entire world
at their doorstep every day thanks to modern forms of consumption and
communication. For another, the breakup of the isolated world of the
Soviet bloc appears to have left the planet as a whole permeated by
uniform principles of modern Western lifestyles. Seen from an economic
perspective, the liberation of market forces from governmental
regulation and the technological innovation in the areas of data
processing and communication seem to have helped create markets in
which supply and demand can become effective worldwide. As wide as the
gap may be between the extreme opaqueness shrouding the
interdependencies of the global economy and the clarity with which
daily experience demonstrates the growing irrelevance of borders, the
term globalization has the significant advantage of doing justice to
both sides, of reconciling reason and emotion and finding their common
denominator. At the heart of this term is a dichotomy that proves time
and again to be as trivial as it is true: the world is becoming
noticeably “smaller” as distant lands are being linked ever more
closely together. At the same time, the world is becoming “larger”
because our horizons have never been so broad.?  ‘Therefore, whoever
seeks to sum up “in a word” the zeitgeist of this most recent turn of
the century finds little alternative but to resort to the constantly
repeated assur- ance that we have entered the era of globalization.

This is the point where historians feel the need to intervene in the
debate. Some of what is being presented in sociological literature as
new findings seems already very familiar to them. Long before the
word “globalization” came into being, for example, economic historians
had rather precisely described the process of emergence and continued
integration of a global economy. In their work, historians strive for
precision both in the factual account and the ascription of cause and
effect. Although historians, when in doubt, have preferred to support
well-founded evidence over flashy arguments, they are just as
susceptible to grand generalizations as are their colleagues in other
disciplines.  For quite a while now, historiography has explained the
changes that the world has experienced in the last two anda half
centuries with the help of all-encompassing concepts of historical
processes, which —like their cousins, the famous “isms” (liberalism,
socialism, etc.)— could be described as the “izations”:
rationalization, industrialization, urbanization, bureaucratization,
democratization, individualization, secularization, alphabetization,
to name a few. Although these processes each follow their own time
pattern and are linked to one another in a very complicated way, what
they all have in common is that they take place overa (very) long
stretch of time, occur in various forms and intensities on all
continents, and unleash a force of change seldom found in earlier,
premodern history. The metaconcept of “modernization” attempts to
integrate these various processes into a single, all-encompassing
development.

Simply by virtue of the term’s semantics, “globalization” seems
predestined to qualify for a place among the macroprocesses of the
modern world. We need not immediately endow the term with an
importance that would place it directly next to (or even above)
“modernization,” nor must we see globalization as the main feature of
global development in an increasingly complex set of distant
contexts. It is enough just to ask whether “globalization” could
possibly be as expressive and important a concept as, for example,
“industrialization.” That alone would be a remarkable achievement and
would greatly enrich the interpretative repertoire of
historiography. Such a concept would be even more welcome since none 
of the above- mentioned “izations” conceptualizes links between peo-
ples, states, and civilizations. They manifest themselves within
national and regional frameworks and therefore are analyzed within
these contexts. Should “globalization” earn a place among the major
concepts of human development, the term would thus fulfill a huge
need.  It would be in a position to offer sanctuary to all those
intercontinental, international, and intercultural notions that
currently wander like homeless vagabonds amid our well-established
historical “discourses.”

The fact that such a need does indeed exist presents us with the
stepping stone to the following discussion.  Let it be clearly
understood that we are not suggesting the wholesale dismissal of all
previous historiography, and we are careful not to make the absurd
claim to want to rewrite the history of the modem era as one of
globalization.  Instead, we will attempt to throw a new light on the
past from the perspective of globalization. In other words, it is a
truism that many aspects of our existence today can only be understood
in connection with worldwide integration. Yet, have not integrative
developments played a greater role in the past than is expressed in
the current historiography?  What sort of integrative developments
were these? How did they function? Did they really add up to a
singular process that justifies using the newly created term
“globalization”?  If so, can we then identify a point near the end of
the twentieth century when the trends toward globalization became so
dramatic and dominant that we dare to speak of a turning point, of
the beginning of a new epoch, of a “global age” (Martin Albrow) or a
“second modernity” (Ulrich Beck, Anthony Giddens) or any other label
we might choose?

## The Core Concept and the Controversies

In the majority of the proposed definitions of “globalization,” the
factors that play a major role are the expansion, concentration, and
acceleration of worldwide relations. Definitions often also contain
various diagnoses of our present era. Inherent in them is often the
question of whether globalization means the demise of the
nation-state, whether it will usher in cultural homogeneity throughout
the world, or whether it will bestow local uniqueness, individuality, and
identity. These movements used the same new technologies to pursue
their own goals more efficiently and to appeal for support from world
opinion. Roland Robertson has called this concurrent development of
homogenization and heterogenization a simultaneous “universalization
of particularism and the particularization of universalism.” At the
same time, he introduces the term “glocalization” in order to
emphasize that global trends always have an impact on local
communities and require special “absorption.”” The outcome of cultural
change through globalization is also often interpreted as “hybridity,”
meaning the result of new cultural elements being creatively adapted
to mesh with existing ones.* Mass media, long-distance travel, and the
global demand for certain consumer goods are considered to be the most
important mechanisms of “glocalization.”

In light of the ease and frequency with which people, goods, and
especially information overcome great distances, numerous authors have
described globalization asa fundamental change of the categories of
time and space. The geographer David Harvey calls this
“space-time-compression.” This can be considered as the third basic
feature of a social scientific understanding of
globalization. “Space-time-compression,” starting with the radical
reduction in telephone fees and the extensive use of electronic mail,
creates a shared immediacy and a “virtual” togetherness and thereby
produces the prerequisites for worldwide social relations, networks,
and systems, within which effective distance is considerably smaller
than geographical distance. The most important cause of this
phenomenon is the increased speed of communication.

Another way to express this idea is to refer to “deterritorialization”
or “supraterritoriality.”® Location, distance, and borders no longer
play a role in many social relationships. Scholars also tend to agree
that globalization should not be understood as the intensified
interaction between nationally delimited societies, but as a trend
toward dismantling territoriality and dissolving spatially linked
sovereignty—this being the geographic counterpart to interpretations
emphasizing the retreat of the state in favor of self-regulating
market forces.

Various leading participants in the debate on globalization use such a
fundamental and widely accepted definition on which to base their more
elaborately developed interpretations and prognoses. Of these, two
should be mentioned: Martin Albrow’s concept of “globality” and Manuel
Castells’s idea of “network society.” For Albrow, “globality” turns
the present into an era unlike anything else in history. The
dimensions of globality, he argues, are reflected in the fact that
environmental issues exist within the framework of a global ecological
system; that the danger of global destruction is inherent in weapons
of mass destruction; that communication systems and markets span the
entire globe; and finally that globality has become reflexive, meaning
that a growing number of people refer to knowledge about the global
context of their actions and attitudes. Manuel Castells describes
globalization as the emergence of a “network society,” a social form
he claims is also historically unprecedented. Computer technology has
made it possible for the first time to organize flexible social
relations independent of territories. In the information age,
economics and politics are no longer organized in a big, hierarchical,
bureaucratic way, but as loosely structured, horizontal
networks. Thus, the basis for exercising power and distributing
resources has changed. Power is no longer manifested in command and
obedience but is anchored in the existence of a network organization
set up each time for a specific purpose. In place of the dichotomies
of repression and exploitation, the social categories “top” and
“bottom,” and geographic “centers” and “peripheries,” the determining
principle is whether one belongs to or is excluded from the
network. The major fault line in Castells’s new world divides those
who are connected from those who are not. 

In addition to such ambitious interpretations of at times prophetic
caliber, there are more modest approaches in which globalization is
not mystified into a historically effective force itself"! but remains
more of a descriptive, overarching concept for a series of concrete
processes of transformation. For David Held and his coauthors,
globalization appears as the result of processes that have been
evolving, though not necessarily continuously, for a long
period. Economic, political, cultural, and military complexes each
continue to follow their own dynamics, and their respective scopes
need not be overlapping. The impact of these processes differs
depending on place, time, and social class. In this view,
globalization is an open (i.e., not predetermined) process that
substantially transforms (but does not eradicate) such institutions of
human collective organization as states, companies, churches, and
families. Unrelentingly it produces counterforces of
fragmentation. James N. Rosenau and Ian Clark, two historically
interested representatives of international relations theory, develop
similar ideas. These so-called ‘transformationalists’ see
globalization as a phenomenon of recent history, but one based on
long-existing processes of spatially extensive political, economic,
cultural, and military interaction.

Finally, it is certainly not hard to find skeptics of the
globalization idea. They should not be confused with the at times very
militant opponents of globalization. The latter share with their
adversaries, the apostles of globalization, the belief that they are
witnessing a fundamental transformation of the modem social and
political world. Skeptics, however, see this belief as an exaggeration
of reality; at times they even consider all the talk about
globalization to be no more than an ideological cover-up for American
strategies of economic control, while others suspect it is a
propaganda trick of neoliberal business elites and technocrats. Paul
Hirst and Grahame Thompson see the standard globalization literature
as little more than a collection of anecdotes, impressions, and
individual facts taken out of context and arranged to suggest that,
taken together, they constitute the “phenomenon” of
globalization. Hirst and Thompson, who concentrate on the economic
aspects, do not find any such connection linking the numerous
examples.

This points once again to the importance of terminology. On the one
hand, anyone who identifies the signs of globalization as a
functioning world market, free world trade and the unimpaired movement
of capital, migratory movements, multinational corporations, an
international division of labor, and a world currency system will be
able to find globalization in the second half of the nineteenth
century. On the other hand, anyone searching for comprehensive
worldwide networking “in real time” will, depending on their
inclination, either feel they are witnessing the dawning of a new era
or indignantly refuse to accept such a superficial diagnosis as the
newest “master narrative” of sociology. As historians, we would
therefore be naive to ask “when globalization began” or “whether
globalization existed in the eighteenth century.” The first thing we
need to do is establish our own concept of “globalization,” one that
avoids both pedantry and excessive vagueness. Such a concept must act
like a searchlight to illuminate the past without throwing the shadows
of foregone conclusions over what we will find.
